# 4.1: Intro to Logic

## Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

* Know how logic is used to make programs more complex
* Understand and use the `if` statement.
* Understand and use the equality operator: `==`

## Introduction

{% embed url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ywFgZIZXGoI" %}

So far our apps have always performed the _same operations_, no matter the input. The next level of complexity is to create programs that perform _different_ operations, depending on the input.

### What is Logic?

From a programming perspective, logic is the ability of the computer to **make decisions** based on input data.

To begin with logic we'll be using the most basic JavaScript logic syntax, the `if` condition. That means that some code will run or not depending on values we test. To start off with, those values will be what the user is typing in- so depending on what the user types, some different things will be displayed in the grey box.

## If Statement

An "**if statement**" is a control-flow "**code block**" that runs if a condition is `true`. A code block is a section of code surrounded by curly braces. We'll talk more about what `true` means when we introduce the boolean data type in [Module 4.3: Boolean And, Not](4.3-boolean-and-not.md).

### Simple Conditional Example: Secret Phrase

Let's write a program that changes the output value of `"hello world"` if we type in a particular phrase.

```javascript
var main = function (input) {
  // Set a default value for myOutputValue
  var myOutputValue = 'hello world';
  // If input is our secret phrase, change the value of myOutputValue
  if (input == 'palatable papaya') {
    myOutputValue = 'you wrote the secret phrase!';
  }
  // return myOutputValue as output
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

Our if statement is on line 5. The conditional inside it tests if `input` is equal to `'palatable papaya'`, our secret phrase. If `input` is equal to `'palatable papaya'`, the code runs between the curly braces on lines 5 and 7, i.e. the "if block". If `input` is not equal to our phrase, the if block does not run.

Code blocks may or may not run depending on "[**control flow**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control\_flow)", i.e. the logic of our app. The 1st way we learned to use code blocks was with functions. If statements are a 2nd way. We'll learn a 3rd code block syntax later in [6.2: Loops](../6-arrays-and-iteration/6.2-loops.md).

Try inputting secret and non-secret phrases into the program. Enter the secret phrase and click the button to see the different output. Enter anything else and click the button to see the default output.

{% hint style="info" %}
Note the distinction in our code example between variable _**declaration**_ and _**assignment**_. On line 2 we "declare" the variable `myOutputValue`. This creates the named container that we can store values inside. On line 5 we "assign" a new value to the `myOutputValue` container. The old value is overwritten and non-retrievable. Notice that declaration with the `var` keyword is only done _once_ per variable. Please do not use `var` when assigning new values to existing variables in conditionals like if statements.
{% endhint %}

### Equality

We're using the "[**comparison operator**](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js\_comparisons.asp)" `==` to test if `input` is equal to `'palatable papaya'`.

{% hint style="info" %}
There are two comparison operators in JavaScript to check for equality, `==`, known as the abstract equality operator, and `===`, the strict equality operator. For the purpose of this course, `==` will suffice, but you are free to explore and experiment. You can read more about the in-depth differences between them in [this ](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/359494/which-equals-operator-vs-should-be-used-in-javascript-comparisons)discussion.
{% endhint %}

## Comments

As our apps get more complicated, we can and should leave notes to ourselves and others to clarify what our code does. "**Comments**" let us write notes in our code files that are ignored on program execution. In JavaScript, comments are denoted by 2 slashes (`//`) at the start of the comment. Every programming language has commenting functionality, though commenting syntax varies by language.

```javascript
// This is an example comment. It won't actually "run".
```

## Knowledge Application: Dice Game

Let's recap and build onto [3.1: Functions ](../3-structuring-and-debugging-code/3.1-functions.md)by building a **function** that generates random dice numbers.&#x20;

We will be using this 'Dice Rolling function' as a base to explore Logic and Control Flow for the rest of this Module.

### Random Number Generation

To simulate dice, we first need random number generation. JavaScript can produce random numbers using a built-in "**library**" called [`Math`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global\_Objects/Math) (_case-sensitive_). `Math` contains functions that perform common and helpful math operations.&#x20;

The function we need is `Math.random()`. **N**_**ote the function call using ()**_

```javascript
var myRandomValue = Math.random();
```

Calling `Math.random()` returns a random decimal number between 0 and 1, inclusive of 0 and exclusive of 1.&#x20;

Note that the `Math.random()` function does not take in an input.

Since we wish to simulate dice with numbers between 1 to 6 inclusive, we have to manipulate the randomly-generated number to get what we want.

To convert our random number to a valid dice roll value, we'll use another `Math` function: `Math.floor()`. We will follow the random integer generation example [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global\_Objects/Math/random) to use `Math.floor()` to convert decimals to integers.

With `Math.random()` and `Math.floor()`, we can make a function that produces any random integer from 0 to a provided `max` number:

```javascript
var getRandomInteger = function (max) {
  // Generate a decimal from 0 through max + 1.
  // This decimal will be inclusive of 0 and exclusive of max + 1.
  var randomDecimal = Math.random() * (max + 1);

  // Remove the decimal with the floor operation.
  // The resulting integer will be from 0 through max, inclusive of 0 and max.
  var resultInteger = Math.floor(randomDecimal);

  return resultInteger;
};
```

### Dice Roll Program Logic

Since we wish to build a program that generates random dice numbers. We use the logic from the above `getRandomInteger` to always return an integer from 1 to 6. We call the new function `rollDice`.

```javascript
var rollDice = function () {
  // Generate a decimal from 0 through 6, inclusive of 0 and exclusive of 6.
  var randomDecimal = Math.random() * 6;

  // Remove the decimal with the floor operation.
  // This will be an integer from 0 to 5 inclusive.
  var randomInteger = Math.floor(randomDecimal);

  // Add 1 to get valid dice rolls of 1 through 6 inclusive.
  var diceNumber = randomInteger + 1;

  return diceNumber;
};
```

### Dice Game Logic

Using our new knowledge of '**logic**' in this chapter, let's implement a simple rule to create a "dice game": <mark style="background-color:blue;">if the user enters the same number as the dice roll, they win.</mark>

```javascript
var main = function (input) {
  // Generate a random dice number
  var randomDiceNumber = rollDice();

  // Default output value is 'you lose'.
  var myOutputValue = 'you lose';

  // If input matches randomDiceNumber, update output.
  if (input == randomDiceNumber) {
    myOutputValue = 'you win';
  }

  // Return output.
  return myOutputValue;
};
```

## Exercises

### **Follow Along**

Duplicate and run the code above.

### **Twice the Guess**

Update our dice game logic such that the user wins if the dice roll is 2 times the guess, e.g. a guess of 1 and roll of 2, a guess of 2 and roll of 4, etc. To win this updated game for a 6-sided dice, the user should only guess numbers between 1 and 3, but the game does not restrict what the user can guess.
